SAC2000 User's Manual


Analysis Capabilities


Overview
SAC2000 is logically divided into functional modules.
Each functional module performs a related set of tasks.
This section briefly describes the commands in each of these modules.
The full command names are used in these descriptions.
Most of the commands have convenient abbreviations.
See the Command Reference Manual for details.


Executive Function Module
Once you have succesfully started SAC2000, you need to know how to get
rid of it!  This is done with the  QUIT command.   END,  EXIT, and  DONE
are also allowed so you shouldn't have any problems.
 FUNCGEN lets you generate various functions in memory.
It is useful for testing the other commands on known functions.
 DATAGEN lets you read sample data from three events (one local,
one regional, and one teleseismic) into memory.
This lets you play with some real seismic data while you are getting
your own data converted to the SAC data file format.
There are several commands that give you information about SAC2000:   NEWS
prints out general information about the latest version of SAC2000,
 HELP and  SYNTAX give you information about a specific command,
and  REPORT gives you the current values of important parameters.
SAC2000 has an extensive macro capability that is described in a later section.
It lets you execute  a set of SAC commands by putting them in a file.
You can define arguments complete with default values, perform simple
arithmetic calculations, store and retrieve information, and control the
flow of command execution with if-tests and do-loops.
 MACRO executes a macro file.
 SETMACRO defines the search path to be used to find a macro file.
 INSTALLMACRO lets you make a macro available for use by anyone
else on your system.
You can store ( SETBB), remove ( UNSETBB), and retrieve ( GETBB) information
and do arithmetic calculations ( EVALUATE) using the ``blackboard.''
You can also save ( WRITEBBF) and restore ( READBBF) information in the
blackboard into a disk file.
Other commands that are useful in a macro include the ability to send a
message to the terminal ( MESSAGE), echo commands to the terminal ( ECHO),
and temporarily suspend the execution of a macro ( PAUSE).
You can write your own SAC command in FORTRAN or C routines that can be loaded
into SAC2000 ( LOAD), and executed thereafter just like an indiginous SAC
command (see Notes and external_interface in misc/external).
 TRACE can be used to have SAC2000 trace header and blackboard variables, 
reporting to the screen when a variable changes values.
 TRANSCRIPT controls SAC2000's transcription capabilities, saving commands, 
and/or error messages, and/or warnings, and/or other output to a text file.
 COMCOR provides command correction.  When SAC2000 detects an error during the
course of executing a command, if this option is set, SAC2000 will allow 
the user to correct the command and continue execution.
 CD changes SAC2000's current working directory.
Finally you can execute operating system commands while running SAC2000
( SYSTEMCOMMAND) and reinitialize SAC2000 to its default state ( INICM).


Condition Execution Module
This module provide commands which contol the flow of commands.
These commands can only be called from within a macro, and are discussed
in greater detail in the section on SAC macros.  The commands in this
module are IF, ELSEIF, ELSE, ENDIF, DO, WHILE, ENDDO, and BREAK.


Data File Module
This module is used to read, write, and access SAC data files.
These data files are described in detail in a later section.
 READ reads data files from disk into memory and  WRITE writes the
data currently in memory to disk.
 CUT defines how much of a data file is to be read.
 READERR controls errors that occur while files are being read and
 CUTERR controls errors due to bad cut parameters.
Each data file has a header which describes the contents of the file.
You can read and write these headers without the data using  READHDR
and  WRITEHDR.
You can also list the contents ( LISTHDR), change values ( CHNHDR),
and copy header values from one file to the others in memory ( COPYHDR).
The  SYNCHRONIZE command changes the headers in memory so that they
all have the same reference time.
You must first use this command before using the  CUT command on files
with different reference times.
You can use  READALPHA to read almost any alphanumeric data file
directly into SAC2000.
The read commands let you use wildcard characters to easily read in groups
of files that contain the same pattern of characters.
The  WILD command controls certain aspects of this wildcard filename expansion.
The SAC data file is stored in binary format for fast reading and writing.
There is also an alphanumeric equivalent of this binary format.
This is useful when transfering SAC data files from one kind of computer
to another kind.
 CONVERT can be used to convert between the binary and alphanumeric formats.
 READCSS reads CSS 3.0 formatted flat files.  Preferences for the way picks
are read in are set in a preferences file but can be modified using the
PICKAUTHOR and PICKPHASE command.  WRITECSS writes the data to flat files.
WRITECSS is currently not working as comprehensively as READCSS.
 DELETECHANNEL allows you to delete one or more files from memory.
 READSDD and  WRITESDD allow reading and writing of SDD data files.


Spectral Analysis Module
You can do a discrete Fourier transform ( FFT) and
an inverse transform ( IFFT).
You can also compute the amplitude and unwrapped phase of a signal ( UNWRAP).
This is an implementation of the algorithm due to Tribolet.
There is a set of Infinite Impulse Response filters ( BANDPASS,  BANDREJ,
 LOWPASS, and  HIGHPASS), a Finite Impulse Response filter ( FIR),
an adaptive Wiener filter ( WIENER), and two specialized filters
( BENIOFF and  KHRONHITE) used at LLNL.
 CORRELATE computes the auto- and cross-correlation functions.
 CONVOLVE computes the auto- and cross-convolution functions.
The  FFT and  UNWRAP commands produce spectral data in memory.
You can plot this spectral data ( PLOTSP),
write it to disk as ``normal'' data ( WRITESP),
and read in back in again ( READSP).
You can also perform integration ( DIVOMEGA) and differentiation ( MULOMEGA)
directly in the frequency domain.
 HANNING applies a "hanning" window to each data file.
 HILBERT applies a Hilbert transform.
 ENVELOPE computes the envelope function using a Hilbert transform.
 KEEPAM keeps amplitude component of spectral files (of either the AMPH or RLIM
format) in SAC memory.


Unary Operations Module
The commands in this module perform some arithmetic operation on each data
point of the signals in memory.
You can add a constant ( ADD), subtract a constant ( SUB), multiply by a
constant ( MUL), or divide by a constant ( DIV).
You can square each data point ( SQR), take the square root ( SQRT),
or take the absolute value ( ABS).
You can take the natural ( LOG) or
base 10 ( LOG10) logarithm of each data point.
You can also compute the exponential ( EXP) or
base 10 exponential ( EXP10) of each data point.
Lastly you can perform integratation ( INT) and differentation ( DIF).


Binary Operations Module
These commands perform operations on pairs of data files.
 MERGE merges (concantenates) a set of files to the data in memory.
 ADDF adds a set of data files to the data in memory.
 SUBF subtracts a set of data files from the ones in memory.
 MULF multiplies a set of data files by the data in memory.
 DIVF divides the data in memory by a set of files.
 BINOPERR controls errors that can occur during these binary operations.


Signal Correction Module
These commands let you perform certain signal correction operations.
 RQ removes the seismic Q factor from spectral data.
 RTREND and  RMEAN remove the linear trend and the mean from data respectively.
 RGLITCHES removes glitches and timing marks.
 TAPER applies a symmetric taper to each end of the data and  SMOOTH
applies an arithmetic smoothing algorithm.
 STRETCH upsamples data, including an optional interpolating FIR filter, while
 DECIMATE downsamples data, including an optional anti-aliasing FIR filter.
You can interpolate evenly or unevenly spaced data to a new sampling interval
using the  INTERPOLATE command.
 LINEFIT computes the best straight line fit to the data in memory and writes
the results to header blackboard variables.
 QUANTIZE converts continuous data into its quantized equivalent.
 REVERSE reverses the order of data points.
Finally, you can rotate pairs of data components through a specified angle
with the  ROTATE command.


Event Analysis Module
This module is used to pick seismic phases.
An automatic phase picking algorithm can be applied using  APK.
You can also use  PPK to pick phases using the graphics cursor.
( PPK is described in the section on Graphics Capabilities).
These picks can be saved in HYPO format using the  OHPF (open HYPO pick file)
and CHPF (close HYPO pick file) commands;  WHPF writes auxiliary cards
into the HYPO pick file.
These picks can also be saved in a more general Alphanumeric format using the
 OAPF (open alphanumeric pick file) and  CAPF (close alphanumeric pick file)
commands.
The picks are also saved in the headers.


Signal Measurement Module
These commands measure and ``mark'' selected attributes about the data in
memory.  These marks are stored in the headers.
 MARKTIMES marks the data in memory with travel times from a velocity set.
 MARKPTP measures and marks the maximum peak to peak amplitude.
 MARKVALUE searches for and marks selected values in a signal.
 MTW sets the ``measurement time window'' option.
When this option is on, the measurements are made within this window only.
Otherwise the measurements are made on the entire signal.
 MTW applies to the  MARKPTP and  MARKVALUE commands only.
 RMS computes the root mean square of the data within the measurement time
window.


Instrument Correction Module
This module currently contains only one command,  TRANSFER.
 TRANSFER performs a deconvolution to remove one instrument response followed
by a convolution to apply another instrument response.
Over 40 predefined instrument responses are available.
A general instrument response can also be specified in terms of its poles
and zeros.


Nerual Network Module
This module has only one command, WRITENN, which writes data files to disk in
neural net format.


XYZ Data Processing Module
The commands in this module produce output that is a function of two input
domains.
 SPECTROGRAM calculates a spectrogram using all of the data in memory.
 GRAYSCALE produces grayscale images of data in memory.
 CONTOUR produces contour plots of data in memory.
 ZLEVELS controls the contour line spacing in subsequent contour plots.
 ZLINES controls the contour linestyles in subsequent contour plots.
 ZTICKS controls the labeling of contour lines with directional tick marks.
 ZLABLES controls the labeling of contour lines with contour level values.
 ZCOLORS controls the color display of contour lines.
 IMAGE produces color sampled image plots of data in memory.
 SONOGRAM calculates a spectrogram equal to the difference between two smoothed
versions of the same spectrogram.


Frequency-waveform Spectral Analysis Module
Most of the command in this module are algorithms to extract wave field
parameters from a suite of seismograms.
 ARRAYMAP produces a map of the array or "coarray" using all files in
SAC memory.
 BBFK computes the broadband frequency-wavenumber (FK) spectral estimate,
using all files in SAC memory.
 BEAMFORM computes the beam using all data files in SAC memory.
 GMTMAP generates a GMT (Generic Mapping Tools) map with station/event
symbols using all the files in SAC memory and an event file specified on the
command line.


Matlab Module
This module provides an interface between SAC2000 and MATLAB, allowing users who
have MATLAB the ability to utilize its facilities and m-files on SAC files.
 3C launch a Matlab GUI for manipulating 3-component data.
 MAT allows processing of SAC data from within SAC2000 using the MATLAB engine.
 SETMAT allows user to specify directory to be added to MATLAB search path.
 CLOSEMAT closes MATLAB, quits the engine.  When called from within MATLAB,
it returns control to SAC2000.


Subprocesses
A subprocess is like a small program within the larger SAC2000 program.
It works like SAC2000 in many ways but the differences are such that it
could not be included in the main program.
Once invoked, only the commands within that subprocess plus a selected
group of commands from the main SAC2000 program can be executed.
The prompt changes to include the name of the subprocess.
When done you can return to the main SAC2000 program using the  QUITSUB command
or terminate SAC2000 using the  QUIT command.


Spectral Estimation Subprocess
This subprocess is for the study of stationary random processes (i.e. noise.)
Three spectral estimation techniques are available: the maximum entropy method,
the maximum likelihood method, and the power density spectra method.


Signal Stacking Subprocess
This subprocess is for performing signal stacking with delays.
The delays can be static or dynamic.
Two velocity models are available.
The signals can be individually weighted.
Traveltimes can be computed, or read from a file.
A record section plot is also part of this subprocess.

