
This directory contains sample data and two sets of macros.
The first set interactively demonstrates some of SAC's features.
The second set automatically tests many of SAC's features.

To use these macros:

(1) The data is stored in the "data" subdirectory.  Because of different
binary data representations on different computers, only alphanumeric
copies of the data files are distributed.  To run the demo or test
macros, you must first convert these alphanumeric data files to binary
data files on your system. Move into the "data" subdirectory, start up
SAC, and run the "tosac" macro. It has no arguments.

(2) The demo macros are stored in the "demo" subdirectory.
Once step (1) above has been completed, to run this demo package
move to the "demo" subdirectory, start up SAC, and run the
"demo" macro.  It has four optional arguments:
  (1) Output graphics device. Default is sunwindows.
  (2) Number of times to execute macro. Default is 1.
  (3) Mode. Either "interactive" in which demo pauses at appropriate
      spots and waits for user to hit a <return> before continuing or
      "automatic" in which demo pauses for 10 seconds at each spot
      but then automatically continues.
  (4) Name of the subdirectory where the demo data is stored.
      Default is the "data" subdirectory.
This macro runs other macros in the "demos" subdirectory which 
demonstrate specific aspects of SAC. The currently available demo 
macros that "demo" uses are:
  (1) "read" demos aspects of the SAC data file format and i/o.
  (2) "plot" demos the various SAC plot formats and layout control.
  (3) "filter" demos a filter bank and some more graphics.

(3) The test macros are stored in the "test" subdirectory.
Once step (1) above has been completed, to run this test package
move to the "test" subdirectory, start up SAC, and run the
"test" macro.  It has three optional arguments:
  (1) Output graphics device. Default is the SAC graphics file.
  (2) Name of the subdirectory in which to store the results. 
      The default is the "results" subdirectory. 
  (3) Name of the subdirectory where the test data is stored.
      Default is the "data" subdirectory. 
This macro runs other macros in the "test" subdirectory which 
test specific aspects of SAC. The currently available test macros 
that "test" uses are:
  (1) "executive" tests the commands in the executive module.
  (2) "datafile" tests the commands in the data file module.
  (3) "graphics" tests the commands in the graphics environment
      and graphics action modules.

(4) Results of running "test" with a stable version of SAC on the 
development computer environment (Sun Sparcstation; SunOS 4.0.3)
are stored in the "baseline" subdirectory. Results from a test
on a different version of SAC, a different version of the operating
system, or a different computer architecture should be compared to
the results in this "baseline" subdirectory.

(5) One can learn a lot about how SAC and SAC macros work by examining 
what these various macros do and how they do it.

                                                           7/5/90
