
SAC Command Reference Manual                             BEGINDEVICES

SUMMARY:
Begins plotting to one or more graphics devices.

SYNTAX:
BEGINDEVICES devices
 
where devices is one or more of the following:
 
SGF, XWINDOWS, SUNWINDOWS
 

ALTERNATE FORMS:
BEGG and BG are obsolete but acceptable names for this command.

INPUT:
      SGF  :  The SAC Graphics File device driver.  

      XWINDOWS  :  The X-windows window display system.  

      SUNWINDOWS  :  The Sun window display system.

DESCRIPTION:
      The arguments to this command consists of a list of one or more graphics
devices.  Subsequent plots are sent to the devices in this list.  This remains
in effect until the next execution of a BEGINDEVICES or ENDDEVICES command or
until SAC is terminated.  Details about each graphics device are given below.
      There are three graphics "devices" currently being supported.  The first
one, SAC Graphics File (SGF), is a general purpose device drivers representing 
a large class of actual physical devices.  The second, XWINDOWS, is a general
windowing system running on most high-resolution, bit-mapped graphics 
workstations.  The third, SUNWINDOW, is a windowing system running under 
SunOS 4.x.  Each device is described in more detail below.  The number, type, 
and names of the graphics devices available on your system may be different 
from this list.  Check with your system administrator or use the REPORT DEVICES 
command to determine which devices are available.
      SGF stands for SAC Graphics File.  A SAC Graphics File contains all the
information needed to generate a single plot on any graphics device.  (Using 
the current computer jargon, these are called graphics "metafiles.") Each plot 
is stored in a separate file.  The file names are of the form "Fnnn.SGF" where 
"nnn" is the plot number, beginning with "001".  You can control some features 
of this file name using the SGF command.  Programs are available which can 
display these files to the terminal, merge several files into a single file, or 
produce an alphanumeric dump of a file for debugging.  Programs are also 
available to convert these files to specific graphics devices such as the Apple 
Laserwriter, Houston Instruments pen plotter, etc.  It is fairly easy to create 
one of these conversion programs.  The format is described in the Users Manual.
      XWINDOWS (or X for short) is a windowing scheme developed under the 
industry-financed Athena project at MIT.  X employs what is called a network
model, where a single process or server controls the screen display.  Other
programs send requests to this server when they want to modify part of the
screen.  X is widely accepted in the graphics workstation area and seems to 
currently offer the best framework for developing portable window-based 
applications.
      SUNWINDOWS is a proprietary windowing system available on the
workstations marketed by Sun Microsystems running SunOS 4.x.  It is not based 
upon the network model.  Each program contains its own set of procedures to 
control the screen.
      The two windowing systems are incompatable.  You must be running under 
one or the other at any given time.  Benchmarks using the SAC graphics library 
do not show significant difference in graphics display speeds between these two 
windowing systems.

(1) For an overview of X, there is an article by Peter A. Hack called
"The Advantages of X" in the August 1987 issue of Computer Graphics World.
 
(2) A technical reference on X is:
James Gettys, Ron Newman, and Tony Della Fera,
"Xlib - C Language X Interface Protocol Version 10", MIT (1986).
 
(3) For information about SUNWINDOWS, there are two manuals written by
Sun Microsystems: "Windows and Window Based Tools", and "Sun View
Programmers's Guide."
 

SEE COMMANDS:
ENDDEVICES, SGF

LATEST REVISION:
Dec 23, 1997 (Version 0.56a)
