
SAC Command Reference Manual                                   CHNHDR

SUMMARY:
Changes the values of selected header fields.

SYNTAX:
CHNHDR  { file n1 n2 ... } field v  {field v ... }

INPUT:
      file  :  This is an optional keyword that can be followed by 
               a list of numbers indicating which file's headers 
               are to be changed.  

      n1 n2 ...:  Integers indicating which file's headers to change.  
      

      field  :  The name of a SAC header variable.  These variables are listed
          in an appendix to this manual.  Also, field may be the keyword ALLT
          as discussed below.  Note:  in order to maintain internal consistency,
          the following header variables cannot be changed with CHNHDR:
          NVHDR, NPTS, NWFID, NORID, and NEVID. 

      v  :  Set the value of that field to v.  The type of the field and its
          new value must match.  Use single quotes for alphanumeric fields
          with embedded blanks.  Use TRUE or FALSE for logical fields.  YES or
          NO are also acceptable for logical fields.  Use variable names (see
          appendix) for value fields.  For offset time fields (B, E, O, A, F,
          and Tn), v may also be of the form: GMT v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 where v1,
          v2, v3, v4, v5, and v6 are the GMT year, julian day, hour, minute,
          second, and millisecond of the time.  If v1 is a two digit number,
          SAC will assume it is in the current century, unless that would mean
          that the year is in the future yet, in which case, SAC assumes the
          previous century.  To be certain you get what you want, use four 
          digits.  

      UNDEF  :  Use this keyword instead of v to "undefine" a header field.  

      ALLT v  :  Add v seconds to all defined header times.  Subtract v
          seconds from the zero time.

DESCRIPTION:
      This command lets you change any of SAC's header fields.  
A specific file or list of files can be changed by specifying the 
integer value(s) corresponding to the order in which the file(s) 
were read in.  If no integer filelist is specified, all files in memory 
will have their header fields changed.  To change the headers of the
files on disk follow this command with the WRITE or WRITEHDR command.  
SAC does some validity checking on the new values but you may want to 
verify the results using the LISTHDR command.
      There is a set of six variables in the header (NZYEAR, NZJDAY, NZHOUR,
NZMIN, NZSEC, and NZMSEC) which contain the reference or "zero" time of the
file.  This is the only GMT in the SAC header.  All other times in the header
(B, E, O, A, F, and Tn) are offsets in seconds relative to this reference
time.  You may change the reference time and all of the defined offset times
by using the "ALLT v" option.  That number of seconds are added to each
defined offset time.  That same number of seconds is also subtracted from the
reference time.  This preserves the actual GMT time of the data.  As a
convenience, you may enter a GMT time instead of a relative time when
changing the offset times.  When the GMT time is entered it is converted to 
a relative time before storing it in the offset time field.
      A description of each of the SAC header fields is contained in 
part 6 of the user manual.  To see this in sac type "help file_format".  

EXAMPLES:
To define the event latitude, longitude and name in all the files in memory:

      u:  CHNHDR EVLA 34.3 EVLO -118.5
 
      u:  CHNHDR KEVNM 'LA goes under'
 
To define the event latitude, longitude and name in files 2 and 4:

      u:  CHNHDR file 2 4 EVLA 34.3 EVLO -118.5
 
      u:  CHNHDR file 2 4 KEVNM 'LA goes under'
 
To change the event type to earthquake:
 
      u:  CHNHDR IEVTYP IQUAKE
 
To set the first arrival time to its undefined state:
 
      u:  CHNHDR A UNDEF
 
Assume you know the GMT origin time of an event and that you want to quickly
change all the times in the header so that this origin time is the zero or
reference time and all other offset times are correct relative to this time.
First set the origin time using the GMT option:
 
      u:  CHNHDR O GMT 1982 123 13 37 10 103
 
Now use the LISTHDR command to find out what O is relative to the current
reference time:
 
      u:  LISTHDR O
 
      s:  O 123.103
 
Now use the ALLT option to subtract this value from all of the offset times
and add it to the reference time.  You also want to change the field that
describes the type of reference time stored in these files.
 
      u:  CHNHDR ALLT -123.103 IZTYPE IO
 
Notice the minus sign because you are subtracting this value from the offset
times.

HEADER CHANGES:
Potentially all header fields.

ERROR MESSAGES:
1006: Length of string variable exceeded at symbol

- Alphanumeric header field too long.
1301: No data files read in.


SEE COMMANDS:
LISTHDR, WRITE, WRITEHDR

LATEST REVISION:
January 8, 1983 (Version 8.0)
