
SAC Command Reference Manual                                      CUT

SUMMARY:
Defines how much of a data file is to be read.

SYNTAX:
CUT {ON|OFF|pdw|SIGNAL}

INPUT:
      ON  :  Turn cut option on but don't change pdw.  

      OFF  :  Turn cut option off.  

      pdw  :  Turn cut option on and change pdw.  A pdw is a partial data
          window.  It consists of a starting and a stopping value of the
          independent variable, usually time, which defines which part of a
          file you wish to read.  The most general form of this pdw is: 
           ref offset ref offset

      ref  :  A reference value, one of the following:
          Z|B|E|O|A|F|N|Tn, where n=0,1...9.
          The meanings of these names are given below.  

      offset  :  A positive or negative number which is added to the
          reference value.  

      SIGNAL  :  Equivalent to typing:  A -1 F +1.

DEFAULT VALUES:
Cut option is off.  If the start or stop offset is omitted it is assumed to be
zero.  If the start reference value is omitted it is assumed to be Z.  If the
stop reference value is omitted it is assumed to be the same as the start
reference value.

DESCRIPTION:
      With the cut option off, the entire file is read.  With it on, only that
portion of the file between the starting and stopping cut values is read.  
These are values in terms of the independent variable in the data file, 
normally time.  See the section on "Data File Structure" in the Users Manual
for a discussion of dependent and independent variables.  The following
mnemonics are used to represent certain values of the independent variable:
 
B: Disk file beginning value.
 
E: Disk file ending value.
 
Z: Zero.
 
N: Interpret offset in terms of number of data points not independent
variable.
Only used for stop values.
 
      The following mnemonics refer to reference values stored in the SAC 
header and are used primarily to cut time files:
 
O: Event origin time.
 
A: First arrival time.
 
F: Signal ending time.
 
Tn: User defined time picks, n = 0,1...9
 
The above mnemonics plus an optional positive or negative offset define 
either a starting or stopping value.  O, A, F, and Tn can be defined for a
given data file using the CHNHDR command.  A and F can also be defined using
the automatic picker (APK) or manual pick plot (PLOTPK) commands.
      If you want to select the same time window from a group of data files 
that have different reference times, you must use the SYNCHRONIZE command
before executing the CUT and READ commands.  SYNCHRONIZE modifies the headers
so that each file has the same reference time.  It also adjusts all of the
relative times, including B and E.  Then when the files are cut, they will
have the same time window.  Since CUT is applied to the headers on disk, you
must use the WRITEHDR command after the SYNCHRONIZE command and before the
READ command to get the correct results.
      You can also pad the beginning or end of a file with zeros by turning
on the FILLZ option in the CUTERR command, defining a cut that extends beyond
the current limits of the file, and then reading the file into memory using
the READ command.

EXAMPLES:
In these examples we assume time is the independent variable and seconds are
the units.
 
B E: Disk begin to disk end---same as turning cut off.
 
B 0 30: First 30 secs of the disk file.
 
A -10 30: From 10 secs before to 30 secs after first arrival.
 
B N 2048: First 2048 points of disk file.
 
30.2 48: From 30.2 to 48 secs relative to disk file zero.
 

ERROR MESSAGES:
1322: Undefined starting cut for file

- undefined reference value in the header record.  - this error can be
controlled by use of CUTERR command.  - when this error is off, the disk begin
value is used.
1323: Undefined stop cut for file

- undefined reference value in the header record.  - this error can be
controlled by use of CUTERR command.  - when this error is off, the disk end
value is used.
1324: Start cut less than file begin for file

- bad CUT parameters.  - this error can be controlled by use of CUTERR command.
- when this error is off, the disk begin value is used or zeros are inserted
at the beginning of the data.
1325: Stop cut greater than file end for file

- bad CUT parameters.  - this error can be controlled by use of CUTERR command.
- when this error is off, the disk end value is used or zeros are inserted at
the end of the data.
1326: Start cut greater than file end for file

- bad CUT parameters.  - this error cannot be turned off.


SPECIAL NOTE: Since this is a parameter-setting command, the above errors 
will not appear until the READ command is executed.  Also, some of the above
errors can be converted to warnings by the use of the CUTERR command.

LIMITATIONS:
There is currently no provision for cutting unevenly-spaced files or spectral
files.

SEE COMMANDS:
READ, APK, PLOTPK, SYNCHRONIZE, CUTERR

LATEST REVISION:
January 8, 1983 (Version 8.0)
