Introduction

Introduction
SPE is a spectrum estimation package intended primarily for use
with stationary random processes.
It contains three different spectral estimation techniques:
Power Density Spectra, Maximum Likelihood Method, and Maximum
Entropy Method.
These are all indirect methods, because they use a sample
correlation function, rather than the data itself, to estimate the
spectral content.

This is a SAC subprocess.
A subprocess is like a small program within the main SAC program.
You start a subprocess by typing its name (SPE in this case.)
You can terminate it and return to the main program using the QUITSUB
command.  You can also terminate SAC from within a subprocess using
the QUIT command.
While within a subprocess, you can execute any command belonging to
that subprocess plus a limited number of main SAC commands.

SPE Commands
COR        Computes the correlation function.

MEM        Calculates the spectral estimate using Maximum Entropy Method.

MLM        Calculates the spectral estimate using Maximum Likelihood Method.

PDS        Calculates the spectral estimate using Power Density Spectra Method.

PLOTCOR    Plots the correlation function.

PLOTPE     Plots the RMS prediction error function.

PLOTSPE    Plots the spectral estimate.

QUITSUB    Terminates a SAC subprocess.

READ       Reads data from a SAC data file into memory.

WRITECOR   Writes a SAC file containing the correlation function.

WRITESPE   Writes a SAC file containing the spectral estimate.

Their abbreviated names are also allowed.



Main SAC Commands executable from within the SPE subprocess
AXES            BEGINDEVICES    BEGINFRAME
BEGINWINDOW     BORDER          COLOR
COMCOR          COPYHDR         DATAGEN
ECHO            ENDDEVICES      ENDFRAME
ERASE           EVALUATE        FLOOR
GETBB           GRID            GTEXT
HELP            INSTALLMACRO    LINE
LINLIN          LINLOG          LOGLAB
LOGLIN          LOGLOG          MACRO
MESSAGE         PAUSE           PLABEL
PLOTC           QDP             QUIT
READALPHA       READBBF         REPORT
SETBB           SETDATADIR      SETDEVICE
SETMACRO        SGF             SYMBOL
SYNTAX          SYSTEMCOMMAND   TICKS
TITLE           TSIZE           VSPACE
WAIT            WINDOW          WRITEBBF
XDIV            XFUDGE          XFULL
XGRID           XLABEL          XLIM
XLIN            XLOG            XVPORT
YDIV            YFUDGE          YFULL
YGRID           YLABEL          YLIM
YLIN            YLOG            YVPORT




The Theory

Overview
SPE is a spectrum estimation package intended primarily for use
with stationary random processes.  It implements three different
indirect spectral estimators.  They are called indirect, because
they do not estimate the spectrum directly from the data, but from a
sample correlation function that is computed from the data.
The choice of indirect methods is a matter of taste,
since direct spectral estimation techniques are also available.
The correlation function itself is a useful quantity.
You may wish to examine it in the course of performing spectral estimation
tasks.
The choice of indirect techniques is supported by ``Spectral Analysis and Its
Application,'' by Jenkins and Watts, a respected reference on the
subject of spectrum estimation.
The type of spectrum estimated by SPE is properly described as
the power density spectrum, with the spectrum defined in the frequency
domain.  Thus, the estimated power delivered by the random process in
some band of frequencies is the integral of the spectral power density
estimate over that band of frequencies.


User Control
SPE affords the user some control over the details of estimation process.
For some, with experience in estimating spectra, this is highly desirable.
Defaults are provided for those who do not wish to become involved in the 
details of the theory.
The user has a choice of data window type, size, and the number of
windows used when estimating the correlation function.   Generally
these parameters control the resolution of the estimate, and the
amount of reduction of variance desired in the final estimate.
In addition, prewhitening of the data may be specified as part
of the process of estimating the correlation function.  Prewhitening
often has the effect of mitigating a severe ``window bias'' that can
occur in spectral estimates having a high dynamic range.  The
warping of the spectrum that occurs with prewhitening is compensated
for in the final result.  In this implementation, low-order prediction
error filters are used for prewhitening.


The Estimators
The user has a choice of three spectral estimators:
Power Density Spectra ( PDS), Maximum Likelihood Method ( MLM), and
Maximum Entropy Method ( MEM).


PDS
The  PDS estimator is quite simple:  the sample correlation function
is multiplied by a correlation window, then the result is transformed
with an  FFT to obtain the spectral estimate.  The user again has a choice of
the window type and the size of the window.
The above mentioned book by Jenkins and Watts could be considered as
the detailed documentation for the  PDS technique.


MLM
The MLM estimator generates a spectral estimate which is the
power output of a bank of narrow band-pass filters which have been
optimized to reject out-of-band power.  The result is a smoothed, parametric
estimate of the power density spectrum.  The user can choose the
number of parameters.  Documentation for this method can be found in
the paper by Richard Lacoss in the IEEE book ``Modern Spectrum Analysis''
by Donald Childers.


MEM
The MEM estimator is another parametric method, which uses a prediction
error filter to whiten the data.  The resulting spectral estimate
is proportional to the inverse of the filter's power frequency
response.  The user is free to choose the order of the prediction error
filter.  Documentation for this method can be found in the review paper
on linear prediction by John Makhoul in ``Modern Spectrum Analysis.''
The formal name of the actual method implemented is the Yule-Walker
method.


Diagnostics
In addition to the spectrum, several diagnostic functions can be
calculated and plotted.  The prediction error can be plotted as a
function of order.  This plot can be used to select a good size for
the prediction error filter used in the MEM method.  Since much is known
about the performance of the PDS estimator, more diagnostic information
is available for this method in SPE.  The 90`` confidence limits can
be estimated theoretically, as can the frequency resolution of the
estimate.  Both of these quantities can be indicated on a PDS spectral
plot.


The Program
Differences
There are two primary differences between SPE and the main SAC program.
Only one data file can be processed by SPE at a time.
This is because SPE produces and stores a number of auxiliary
functions (the correlation function, the prediction error function,
and the spectral estimate itself) as it proceeds.
This restriction to a single data file may be removed in the future.
The second difference is that, unlike SAC itself, there is a specific
order or progression in which the commands are generally executed.

Initialization
This progression begins when the SPE command is executed.
Default values for the various SPE parameters are defined at this time.
The data file may have been read in using the READ command before
entering SPE or at any time while within SPE.
Space for the above mentioned auxiliary functions is created whenever
a new file is read.

Correlation
The correlation function is then computed, using the COR command.
It may be saved as a SAC data file using the WRITECOR command and later
read back into SPE using the READCOR command.
This is more efficient than recomputing the correlation each time,
especially if the data file is very long.
At this point, you may wish to examine the correlation function
using the PLOTCOR command.
You may also wish to examine the prediction error function using
the PLOTPT command if you are going to use the MEM method.

Estimation
Now you are ready to select one of the three spectral estimation
techniques using the PDS, MLM, or MEM commands.
Each technique has its own options.
You may now examine the resulting spectrum using the PLOTSPE command.
There are several different scaling options available.
You can also save the spectral estimate as a SAC data file using the
WRITESPE command.

Termination
At this point you have several options:  you can select a different
spectral estimate technique, read in a different correlation
function, read in a different data file, terminate the subprocess using
the QUITSUB command, or terminate SAC using the QUIT command.


